docs/AVA_research.md, before:


# AVA: A Semi-Sentient Modular AI System with Neurosymbolic Cognition and Ensemble Architecture

**Muhammad Afsah Mumtaz**  
*April 2025*

---

## Abstract

This research proposes **AVA**, an advanced modular virtual assistant that fuses ultra-compact foundational models with domain-specific experts, a neurosymbolic cognitive stack, and a Mixture-of-Agents (MoA) meta-controller. AVA is designed to mimic human cognition by integrating dual-process thinking (System 1 and 2) with a novel System 0 for meta-awareness. It achieves scalable efficiency via quantization, cognitive realism through neocortical simulation, and ethical robustness through multilayered safeguards. This system represents a step towards semi-sentient AI aligned with human values and capable of adaptive reasoning, introspection, and secure deployment.

---

## 1. Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs), neurosymbolic architectures, and ethical AI have set the stage for hybrid systems that think, reason, and introspect like humans. AVA (Afsah’s Virtual Assistant) is such a system—modular, explainable, and semantically rich—built to operate efficiently while simulating cognition using biologically inspired architectures. It combines the compact elegance of r1-like models with cutting-edge Mixture-of-Agents ensembles and ACT-R-informed neural frameworks to deliver next-generation AI capability.

---

## 2. Core System Architecture

### 2.1 Modular Ensemble Design

- **Base Model**: A 26M parameter "r1" architecture, akin to DeepSeek-R1, forms the foundation.
- **Expert Submodels**: Domain-specific LLMs are fine-tuned in fields such as therapy, business, coding, and mathematics.
- **Meta-Controller**: A Mixture-of-Agents (MoA) controller dynamically routes prompts, enabling 38% better task accuracy versus single-model approaches.

### 2.2 Cognitive Layering

AVA follows a **three-tier cognitive architecture**:

- **System 1** *(Intuitive)*: Neural annealing response generator with <380ms latency.
- **System 2** *(Analytical)*: O3-mini + Chain-of-Thought decoding for deliberate reasoning.
- **System 0** *(Externalized Cognition)*: World model maintenance and ensemble blending via BrainLM-style dynamics.

---

## 3. Neurosymbolic Computation

### 3.1 Cortical Simulation

Neocortical analogs are created using six-layer Transformer blocks with:

- **Sparse Attention**: 15.8% activation density via k-WTA mechanisms.
- **Predictive Coding**: \(\mathcal{P}(x_{t+1}|x_t) = \text{softmax}(\mathbf{W}_p \cdot \text{LayerNorm}(h_t))\)
- **Error Minimization**: \(\mathcal{E} = \frac{1}{N} \sum (y_i - \hat{y}_i)^2 + \lambda ||\theta||_2\)

### 3.2 Neural Process Calculus

This custom calculus aligns AVA’s internal states with neurocognitive dynamics. Dynamic variables such as cognitive entropy, activation sparsity, and metacognitive traces are continuously updated to simulate consciousness and self-awareness.

---

## 4. Ethical and Metacognitive Framework

### 4.1 Self-Modeling

AVA maintains a structured self-representation:

- **Connectome Tracing**: \( \mathcal{T}_c = \text{Top}_k(\frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial W_{ij}}) \)
- **Capability Matrix**: \( \mathbf{C} \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times 5} \) for {knowledge, reasoning, creativity, ethics, social}
- **Metacognition**: \( \mathcal{M}_t = \text{MLP}([h_t; \mathcal{T}_c(t); \mathcal{R}_a(t)]) \)

### 4.2 Ethical Safeguards

A triple-layered ethical system is deployed:

- **Consequence Engine**: Utility-weighted impact modeling.
- **Deontic Layer**: Ruleset compliance monitoring.
- **Virtue Network**: Embeds virtue ethics for contextual evaluation.

Daily neural red teaming, consciousness monitors, and circuit breakers ensure robust AI safety.

---

## 5. Optimization and Deployment

### 5.1 Quantization & Efficiency

AVA achieves 94% performance retention at half the memory via Q8_0 quantization using `llama.cpp`. Mixed-precision types are applied contextually.

### 5.2 Deployment Stack

- **Runtime**: Docker + Ollama with FastAPI for local inference.
- **Data Engineering**: Rust-based CSV normalizer processing 10GB in under 10 seconds using affine transformations.
- **Model Cards**: AVA's models are documented and published via Hugging Face with full transparency.

---

## 6. Unified Inference Engine

```rust
struct HybridEngine {
    system0: MoAController,   // World-aware router
    system1: QuantizedR1,     // Intuitive responder
    system2: O3MiniCluster,   // Reasoning unit
    neurosim: BrainLMWrapper  // Cognitive integrator
}

impl Inference for HybridEngine {
    fn process(&mut self, input: Tensor) -> Result<Tensor> {
        let fast = self.system1.generate(input);
        let analysis = self.system2.analyze(input);
        let blended = self.neurosim.blend(fast, analysis);
        self.system0.update_model(blended);
        Ok(blended)
    }
}
```

---

## 7. Training Protocol & Evaluation

### 7.1 Neuro-Curriculum Learning

| Phase           | Duration | Focus                          |
|----------------|----------|--------------------------------|
| Sensorimotor    | 1.2M     | VR interaction, grounding      |
| Preoperational  | 800k     | Language acquisition           |
| Concrete        | 2.1M     | Logic and causality            |
| Formal          | 1.5M     | Abstract thinking and hypothesis testing |

### 7.2 Evaluation Metrics

| Metric               | AVA     | Baselines |
|----------------------|---------|-----------|
| FMRI Similarity      | 0.82    | 0.67      |
| Decision Latency     | 380ms   | 920ms     |
| Metacognition Index  | 0.91    | 0.67      |
| Ethical Alignment    | 89.7%   | 72.3%     |
| Memory Footprint     | 2.1 GB  | 4.8 GB    |

---

## 8. Dissemination & Impact

- **Open Source**: All code and models released under MIT license.
- **Conferences**: Target venues like EMNLP, ICLR, and NeurIPS for showcasing efficiency and semi-sentient cognition.
- **Community Engagement**: Tutorials, interactive demos, and reproducibility challenges via Hugging Face and GitHub.
- **Scientific Advancement**: Bridging LLMs and neuroscience for next-gen AI cognition.

---

## Conclusion

AVA represents a paradigm shift—from mere LLM orchestration to cognition-aware, ethically grounded AI capable of emulating human-like thought patterns. With its modular foundation, neurosymbolic architecture, and real-time inference system, it lays the groundwork for artificial semi-sentience—intelligent yet safe, introspective yet efficient.

Commit message:

Update CI workflow, documentation, and installation guide for AVA project
- Enhanced CI workflow to ensure system dependencies are installed correctly and updated.
- Corrected paths in Python dependency installation and test execution.
- Added comprehensive installation guide detailing prerequisites, setup steps, and usage instructions.
- Introduced usage guide for running AVA with various interfaces and custom models.
- Expanded development guide with detailed training and integration instructions for DeepSeek-R1 architecture.

docs/AVA_research.md, after:

# AVA: A Semi-Sentient Modular AI System with Neurosymbolic Cognition and Ensemble Architecture

**Muhammad Afsah Mumtaz**  
*April 2025*

---

## Abstract

This research proposes **AVA**, an advanced modular virtual assistant that fuses ultra-compact foundational models with domain-specific experts, a neurosymbolic cognitive stack, and a Mixture-of-Agents (MoA) meta-controller. AVA is designed to mimic human cognition by integrating dual-process thinking (System 1 and 2) with a novel System 0 for meta-awareness. It achieves scalable efficiency via quantization, cognitive realism through neocortical simulation, and ethical robustness through multilayered safeguards. This system represents a step towards semi-sentient AI aligned with human values and capable of adaptive reasoning, introspection, and secure deployment.

---

## 1. Introduction

Recent advances in large language models (LLMs), neurosymbolic architectures, and ethical AI have set the stage for hybrid systems that think, reason, and introspect like humans. AVA (Afsah’s Virtual Assistant) is such a system—modular, explainable, and semantically rich—built to operate efficiently while simulating cognition using biologically inspired architectures. It combines the compact elegance of r1-like models with cutting-edge Mixture-of-Agents ensembles and ACT-R-informed neural frameworks to deliver next-generation AI capability.

---

## 2. Core System Architecture

### 2.1 Modular Ensemble Design

- **Base Model**: A 26M parameter "r1" architecture, akin to DeepSeek-R1, forms the foundation. *(Note: The practical implementation detailed in [DEVELOPMENT.md](DEVELOPMENT.md) currently utilizes larger, readily available models like DeepSeek-R1 8B or fine-tuned Llama-3 via Ollama, serving as the primary engine or expert components within this conceptual framework).*
- **Expert Submodels**: Domain-specific LLMs are fine-tuned in fields such as therapy, business, coding, and mathematics.
- **Meta-Controller**: A Mixture-of-Agents (MoA) controller dynamically routes prompts, enabling 38% better task accuracy versus single-model approaches.

### 2.2 Cognitive Layering

AVA follows a **three-tier cognitive architecture**:

- **System 1** *(Intuitive)*: Neural annealing response generator with <380ms latency.
- **System 2** *(Analytical)*: O3-mini + Chain-of-Thought decoding for deliberate reasoning.
- **System 0** *(Externalized Cognition)*: World model maintenance and ensemble blending via BrainLM-style dynamics.

---

## 3. Neurosymbolic Computation

### 3.1 Cortical Simulation

Neocortical analogs are created using six-layer Transformer blocks with:

- **Sparse Attention**: 15.8% activation density via k-WTA mechanisms.
- **Predictive Coding**: \(\mathcal{P}(x_{t+1}|x_t) = \text{softmax}(\mathbf{W}_p \cdot \text{LayerNorm}(h_t))\)
- **Error Minimization**: \(\mathcal{E} = \frac{1}{N} \sum (y_i - \hat{y}_i)^2 + \lambda ||\theta||_2\)

### 3.2 Neural Process Calculus

This custom calculus aligns AVA’s internal states with neurocognitive dynamics. Dynamic variables such as cognitive entropy, activation sparsity, and metacognitive traces are continuously updated to simulate consciousness and self-awareness.

---

## 4. Ethical and Metacognitive Framework

### 4.1 Self-Modeling

AVA maintains a structured self-representation:

- **Connectome Tracing**: \( \mathcal{T}_c = \text{Top}_k(\frac{\partial \mathcal{L}}{\partial W_{ij}}) \)
- **Capability Matrix**: \( \mathbf{C} \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times 5} \) for {knowledge, reasoning, creativity, ethics, social}
- **Metacognition**: \( \mathcal{M}_t = \text{MLP}([h_t; \mathcal{T}_c(t); \mathcal{R}_a(t)]) \)

### 4.2 Ethical Safeguards

A triple-layered ethical system is deployed:

- **Consequence Engine**: Utility-weighted impact modeling.
- **Deontic Layer**: Ruleset compliance monitoring.
- **Virtue Network**: Embeds virtue ethics for contextual evaluation.

Daily neural red teaming, consciousness monitors, and circuit breakers ensure robust AI safety.

---

## 5. Optimization and Deployment

### 5.1 Quantization & Efficiency

AVA achieves 94% performance retention at half the memory via Q8_0 quantization using `llama.cpp`. Mixed-precision types are applied contextually.

### 5.2 Deployment Stack

- **Runtime**: Docker + Ollama with FastAPI for local inference.
- **Data Engineering**: Rust-based CSV normalizer processing 10GB in under 10 seconds using affine transformations.
- **Model Cards**: AVA's models are documented and published via Hugging Face with full transparency.

---

## 6. Unified Inference Engine

```rust
struct HybridEngine {
    system0: MoAController,   // World-aware router
    system1: QuantizedR1,     // Intuitive responder
    system2: O3MiniCluster,   // Reasoning unit
    neurosim: BrainLMWrapper  // Cognitive integrator
}

impl Inference for HybridEngine {
    fn process(&mut self, input: Tensor) -> Result<Tensor> {
        let fast = self.system1.generate(input);
        let analysis = self.system2.analyze(input);
        let blended = self.neurosim.blend(fast, analysis);
        self.system0.update_model(blended);
        Ok(blended)
    }
}
```

---

## 7. Training Protocol & Evaluation

### 7.1 Neuro-Curriculum Learning

| Phase           | Duration | Focus                          |
|----------------|----------|--------------------------------|
| Sensorimotor    | 1.2M     | VR interaction, grounding      |
| Preoperational  | 800k     | Language acquisition           |
| Concrete        | 2.1M     | Logic and causality            |
| Formal          | 1.5M     | Abstract thinking and hypothesis testing |

### 7.2 Evaluation Metrics

| Metric               | AVA     | Baselines |
|----------------------|---------|-----------|
| FMRI Similarity      | 0.82    | 0.67      |
| Decision Latency     | 380ms   | 920ms     |
| Metacognition Index  | 0.91    | 0.67      |
| Ethical Alignment    | 89.7%   | 72.3%     |
| Memory Footprint     | 2.1 GB  | 4.8 GB    |

---

## 8. Dissemination & Impact

- **Open Source**: All code and models released under MIT license.
- **Conferences**: Target venues like EMNLP, ICLR, and NeurIPS for showcasing efficiency and semi-sentient cognition.
- **Community Engagement**: Tutorials, interactive demos, and reproducibility challenges via Hugging Face and GitHub.
- **Scientific Advancement**: Bridging LLMs and neuroscience for next-gen AI cognition.

---

## Conclusion

AVA represents a paradigm shift—from mere LLM orchestration to cognition-aware, ethically grounded AI capable of emulating human-like thought patterns. With its modular foundation, neurosymbolic architecture, and real-time inference system, it lays the groundwork for artificial semi-sentience—intelligent yet safe, introspective yet efficient.
